You asked me some time ago if religion had an effect
on my life. Really, it didn't. But in my last, I'm 66
now, I'd say in my last probably 15, 20 years,
I realized that there really is a God, and he has an
influence on our life, and I pray to him. But you've
become more religious now as you've become older.
Yes. Why do you think that is?
I think it's nothing more but experience,
judgment, and more wisdom. I'm convinced older
person gets more wisdom than he has. I think that
makes sense. Sure. A lot of ways I think I'm smarter
now than I was when I know I am.
Going back to your original question, when I got
out of high school and saw that I couldn't go to West
Point, I
thought, well, I'll take the written examination
to the Flying Cadets. I know I can do this because of
regulations at that time.
I borrowed some books on some subjects that I had
not been studying in the West Point Preparatory
School in 1935 down at Fort Sam for the West Point
Interest Exam. There were questions in physics,
trigonometry, and one or two other subjects on the
flying cadet examination that I hadn't been
studying in my previous West Point Preparatory
School in the United States Army. So I borrowed a
book in physics. trigonometry, and on my own at
home, started studying those subjects. And then
when I went down to, I was one of 14 people,
entrance, trying to get into flying cadets at that
time, and went to Barksdale Air Force Base in
Shreveport, Louisiana, to take a physical
examination. I was only one out of 14 that passed a
physical examination, with reservations in my
case also, that I had to have my nose operated on to
remove a crooked septum. And
I got that done. They accepted me physically and
then permitted me to take the written
examination. And through the help of some of the
instructors at Randolph Air Force Base, whom I had
known in the military, in the West Point Prep
School, at Fort Sam. I passed the examination and I
think there I was about, I think it was about two or
three out of about 15 or 20 that made that. So that
made me real proud. And that put me in the flying
cadets in March of 1938.
And Randolph Air Force Base in San Antonio. Okay,
now tell me about the cadets. Is it basically
training? Oh yes, training and teaching you to fly
because I'm a pilot. It was a one year course, nine
months at Randolph Air Force Base divided into
primary and basic training where you soloed and
then the next four and a half months you got a little
bit more advanced airplanes. Then the last three
months, you go over to Kelly Air Force Base, the
other side of San Antonio, in those days, and take
specialized courses either in bombing, attack,
or pursuit or observation. It was called pursuit
in those days, fighter today. I took fighters or
pursuit. Why did you want to be a fighter pilot
instead of bomber or observation? Well, I liked
the glamour of it. Flying your own airplane,
you're the only person in the airplane, and the
acrobatics. It was
fun. It appealed to me. Also, I developed in those
days, just thinking about it, the idea that if I was
in an airplane, I could control the airplane
myself, and I could fire and shoot at another
airplane, whereas if I was sitting in a bomber,
Maybe I have to sit there and let them shoot at me and
maybe take it. Sure. Fighters appealed to me. And
the first chance I had at Randolph Air Force Base
after I soloed, I had been taught to do slow rolls,
shown how to do a slow roll by my instructor. But the
first chance I had in flying an airplane by myself,
I did a slow roll. I thought it was the greatest
thing in the world.
Now, in 1938, when you went to cadet school, then
you went active duty, full-time military. Yes.
That was the first time. I graduated from Kelly
Field in February of 1939. And incidentally,
there I flew the key slot of the entire graduating
class in formation. Number two man on the lead
instructor. I'm real proud of that. Again, I
turned out to be an A student
And then upon graduation, we were assigned to our
first tactical unit. And upon graduation, is that
when you received the permission? I became a
second lieutenant reserve in a Army Air Corps,
United States Army Air Corps. That's in 1939, when
you received your first assignment, which was at
Langley Field in Virginia. Right, second bomb
group. And of all things, they put me in bombers.
Yeah, I don't understand that. I've often asked
that question. I think there were 17 of us in my
graduating class that went to
Langley Field, and at Langley Field there was an
aid pursuit group and a second bomb group, and they
had to divide us up, of course. Well, I think they
did alphabetically, and they took the top ones and
put them in bombers. That's the only way I can
figure it out. At any rate, I was put in
bombardment, and looking back now, again, the
good Lord may have been taking care of me. I don't
know. Maybe it's fate, but the experience turned
out to be worthwhile. I got some experience in
B-17s. At that time, the Air Force only had 14
B-17s, and I became a pilot of one of those
airplanes. That was unheard of in those days. You
had to be seven feet tall, be... hundred years old
to be a pilot, one of those things. And I got to go on
one of the very few goodwill flights down to South
America. Oh, did you? In November 1939 with 7B-17.
Really, part of the good neighbor policy. Right,
right. How did they brief you before you went down?
What did they tell you? Oh, we went through, I guess
it took six months to plan that trip. Mm-hmm. At the
time, there was no such thing as airwaving or
anything, but we used Pan American Airlines as
sort of a forerunner, and used their experience,
and, well, for instance, we had to fly over the
Andes, you know, across from Peru to southern part
of Brazil, and followed a route they had
established. Pan Am really blazed the way for the
trip. And incidentally, Kurt LeMay was the first
lieutenant navigator for that flight, and I was
his assistant operations officer. And tell me
about him. Fantastic man. I knew the minute I met
that man and worked with him that I knew one of these
days he was going to be one of the greatest leaders
in aviation. He was the same way as the first
lieutenant that he was as four-star general. And
what way was that? All business. He still had an
understanding of people, and for some reason or
other, I think the reason he took an interest in me
is he saw my determination and dedication
compared to my fellow second lieutenant that came
to Langley Field. He was a first lieutenant? He was
a first lieutenant, and I was a second lieutenant,
of course, and he mainly took me under his wing. He
was just such an operational officer. What kind of
person was he? He
wasn't a gregarious type, a social type. He was all
business, smoked cigars then. Very much like you
saw and have seen pictures and stories of him.
Very, very much the same. Not near the iron-ass
type. of a person in his heart, not near, in his
heart, that people made him out to be. He was not, if
you will, the son of a bitch that Patton was. He was
not that type. But he was definitely a leader. He
could do anything that he required you to do. And
that impressed me. He could do it better. Anything
he required you to do, If you couldn't do it, he'd
show you how to do it. And this Danley, he trained as
a fighter pilot, too, in his earlier days. So how
was this trip with him? Oh, it was fantastic. As a
matter of fact, Curt LeMay was one of the earlier
officers I modeled myself after. Oh, really?
Really, one of the earliest. I knew he was going to
go places. So you sort of, he was your role model one
night? Not exactly a model. I guess in those
earlier days I didn't have a particular hero or a
particular model, but I respected him less. I
respected him more than I did my squadron
commander.
I respected competence in my superiors. I
demanded it in my subordinates as I grew up in the
military.
But tell me about this trip. It was nothing in the
world but a normal—in those days it was a
spectacular trip. Sure. Four-engine bombers.
How many bombers? We had five on that trip. That's
that trip,
right? We had some experiences on the trip that in
those days were
unusual, unexpected. First, you just didn't have
an aircraft that would fly that far. Whoever heard
of the United States Air Force, as you call it
today, flying airplanes across the oceans around
other countries? It was unusual in those days. In
foreign countries, the arrangements you had to
make,
flying over the Andes at altitudes, flying over
the Andes at 21,000 feet, puffing on a stick with
oxygen in it, and still looking up above you at the
peaks. Those things in those days you wouldn't
forget. And having engines ice up, you know. The
first time here, you know, that's the first
experience high altitude flying. Twenty-one
thousand feet, you know, gets unheard of those
days. And then, of course— Were you afraid at the
time? No. I can remember, I was a copilot on that
flight for Dono, and my job was to keep those
engines running. We had navigators do the
navigation. My job was to keep the engines
performing and using as little fuel as possible,
and I loved it. And when the engines started icing
up, I un-iced them. Just using the mixture
control, possibly, and putting the carburetor
heat on. Well-trained. I knew my job. That's the
reason I was selected. I was a brand-new second
lieutenant going with all these veterans. Did
you lose any planes? No. As a matter of fact, we had
some accidents. And of course, my particular
aircraft crew was the ones that had some of the
misfortunes. We lost a radio over the Andes on the
way from Lima, Peru to Asuncion, Paraguay and got
lost. And it got a little hairy then. I remember it
got a little hairy then. How'd you find it?
Matter of fact, we didn't find Asuncion Paraguay.
We landed at Sao Paulo, Brazil,
but flying, letting down over the water. You did it
with a mountain, not knowing where we are. Then
groping our way back to the coast and finding Sao
Paulo, Brazil, and landing there. And then, the
following day, the weather cleared, got a radio
fixed, we went on on to Susquehanna Paraguay.
Then, of course, we came up to Rio de Janeiro, won
the airplane, got in mud, lost props. On the way
back, last leg from Curacao, Venezuela, on the way
to Langley, we lost number three engine and had to
go into Jacksonville. So again, we didn't. land
and all the heroes welcome it by the field, but we
finally got back. Tremendous experience. What
did you learn from it? Well, what a four-engine
bomber can do, particularly from a standpoint of
transportation, not necessary bombings. And
also, the impact that you can have in a show of force
of military What was the impact, and how did you get
along with the people in South America? We got
along fine with them. Everybody was impressed
with the air power. This was a forerunner of the air
power of the United States. And we were at Old
Kirtland, we later were at Ed Sack, and you know,
calling it to the world.
We were decorated by the President of Brazil. I was
introduced to the diplomatic world for the first
time. A young second lieutenant, old Charlie
Bond, who came from nothing. Here I am in the
capital of Rio de Janeiro, being honored by the
President, and living on Copacabana Beach. Wow.
Gee, eating it up, and given a medal. A blue medal
over there, just for participating in that
flight.
And there's no doubt then that I knew that bombers
were here to stay, transport aircraft,
long-range aviation. I knew it was here to stay.
But I still had love for fighters, and I still
wanted to get in the 8th Pursuit Group right up the
hangar line from us. Were there any problems
whatsoever with the South Americans? I'm glad you
asked that question. We've always had problems
with South America. Well, ever since Teddy
Roosevelt, we've had problems with South
America. And the tension sometimes between
America and the South American countries runs
high. And I was wondering if there were, during New
Deal and during the good neighbor policy of
Roosevelt, he was trying to improve those
relations. And was there tension? And this is one
of the reasons we were making these flights.
Right, yeah. Matter of fact, it was called a
goodwill flight. Mm-hmm. And if you remember,
after that, there were two or three of them made.
And in fact, before that, there was one or two made.
I was right in the middle of it. But that's one of the
longest ones, and the most general one. As a matter
of fact, it went all over South America. But I
distinctly remember, and this is something I
learned, I remember definitely the German
influence in Brazil. Even in those days, 1939,
was that right? November 1939. See, it was just
before World War II. No, the war had just started.
Yeah. Right. Right. But we weren't in it. No. The
United States wasn't in it. No. But you could see
the German training, the influence. I saw actual
pictures of Hitler. Really? On walls of some of the
buildings in Rio de Janeiro. Knowing now what I
didn't know then, the effective military
assistance group, you know, where you provide
military aid, support. It was dominant,
dominant, particularly in Brazil. Germans were
ready to take over Brazil. And if you remember,
when we did get into war, there was quite some naval
activity up and down the Brazilian and Argentine.
As a matter of fact, quite a naval battle right in
the Argentine area. Looking back now, I could see
it then developing. And we'll get to this later on,
but subsequently on the way to China, the Flying
Tigers in 1941, I saw the Japanese and the Dutch
effects in the
Indies. Surabaya Java gun emplacements, a new war
was coming. I want to stick right here on this very
interesting topic of the Germans there. You
thought that the Germans were ready to take over in
Brazil? Looking back now, I can see that they were
moving in as countries do today. A perfect example
is the way Russia has moved into Angola.
Oh, Afghanistan, it's obvious. But the way they
moved into Angola, the way they moved into
Ethiopia, the way they moved into a lot of areas.
The current experience in Central America
through Cuba. Exactly. Exactly. Now how, back in
1939, was your mission to try to combat this German
influence? I'm sure that at the higher levels,
Just like we're doing today amongst nations. Were
you briefed before you went down there by State
Department officials or anybody? Yes. As a matter
of fact, a State Department official went with us
in the form of General Matthew Ridgeway. Oh. He
went with you? Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. I bet. And he was to
advise the commander, General Andrews at that
time. That's not his name. I'll think of it.
He's a Brigadier General in charge of what they
call the General Headquarters of the Army Air
Corps in Langley Field.
The name will come back to me in the transcript.
I'll get this. You bet we were briefed. What did
they tell you? Briefed on the conduct. Briefed on,
as a matter of fact, we were briefed. I remember
specifically. What did they say? What did the
State Department officials tell you? Well, the
State Department official was really advising
the commander. He didn't make a talk to the
crewman, but down a chain of command, we'd be told
through our pilot of our crew, well, now look,
we're going to this shindig tonight, and just be on
your own, keep your mouth shut, observe, and then
we'll talk about it later on.
In Brazil, I think the real ultimate purpose of our
trip was to try to impress the Brazilian
government on the military capability. In other
words, four engine bombers of the United States
military, at that time Army
Don't get locked in too much with the Germans. Here
we have foreign military airplanes that are
flying over your country from the United States
right now. Show of force, looking back now, show of
force is what we were doing. You follow me on show of
force? Sure. Military, I'm sure you do. Well,
that's what we were doing. Did it work? It was too
late. Too late. See, this was November 39. Sure.
Were the South Americans friendly toward you?
Yes. As a matter of fact, you could see, looking
back now, in South Park, Brazil, I remember part of
the Brazilian Air Force. As a matter of fact, I have
a picture of that gentleman someplace in
my album. A very impressive, strictly
oppression-type officer. He was commander in
the... southern area of Brazil, the Air Force, and
definitely oriented to the Germans. As a matter of
fact, I remember references to pictures of Hitler
in this, I think it was in the embassy,
not the American embassy, but some public
building where we were having this, you know, he
was
We were the one crew they gave a big shindig for. And
looking back now, there's no doubt that group, the
Brazilian airmen, they were oriented to Germany,
no doubt. See, some of their aircraft, their
equipment was German. Yeah, sure. I don't even, I
can't remember. Frankly, I don't even know if we
had, I'm sure we had a semblance of a foreign
military
policy, but there's no doubt that at that time, you
know, Roosevelt was trying to make it stronger.
Sure. Somewhat the way Reagan's trying to do
today. Sure. What about the rest of the countries?
I mean, how'd you get along with the people in those
countries? Well, of course, we flew from Panama to
Lima,
Peru.
In Panama, I don't recall really we'd grown an
American air base there. I hardly even recall any
Arabian children from Panamanian. But in Lima,
Peru, definitely very cordial and that along
fine. The German influence wasn't on the West
Coast yet. But then when he crossed over into
Asuncion, Paraguay, poverty-ridden country
that was, I think, frankly, the only reason we
stopped there is
there was a logical place for refueling over the
Andes, how to burn up fuel and all. And we were
treated great. But in Rio, we were really wined and
dined for the present on down. As a matter of fact,
We took the president on my airplane in a formation
flight over the bay of Rio de Janeiro. The
president of Brazil was on our airplane. Where did
he sit, up in a cockpit? He sat up in a cockpit. I got
out of the co-pilot's cockpit, and he sat in my
seat. I think it was impressive to him. As a matter
of fact, I know it was, but it was too late. It's like
some time today, we're too late. No, Ridgway. I
never did really understand his, he was a general,
Brigadier General Ridgway, I know that. I think
what he was, was sort of head of the military
intelligence. He was an Army general, not an Army
Air Corps general. Terrific guy, by the way.
And by the way, he's not the Ridgway that was in
Korea, I don't think he is. No, the one that was
certainly in the Philippines. That's not the same
one. This man had to have connections with the
intelligence agency. This is Matthew Ridgeway,
though. No. No. Oh, that's what you said before.
Did I say Matthew Ridgeway? Mm-hmm. I'd have to.
Well, it's not the same Ridgeway. Oh, OK. Maybe I
said Matthew because of the name. But it's not the
same Ridgeway as the one in the Philippines or the
great chief of staff. Yeah. You know, wait, I'm
going to have to check that later on. This could
have been the same one. Sure. I'm going to have to
check that. I think it was. I said Matthew, didn't
I? Yeah. Well, it must be. I'm not sure that's who it
was, but I'll have to check this on you. fine on the
transcript. What kind of man was he? You could
never figure out what his job was. But he was
definitely in the intelligence area. I am sure
that man then was collecting information on the
Germans. I'm sure he was. Did he ever discuss any of
this with you? No, not with the second lieutenant.
But even then, I knew in my lowly possession of a
crew member and a brand new second lieutenant in
the Air Force that
This man had a definite mission, and he was always
with the Brigadier General commanding the whole
flight. He was always right up to his side.
What kind of man was he? He was an impressive
person, very diplomatic, strictly the diplomat
type, not the military type.
very gregarious, likable.
As an Army general, I don't know how competent he
was. He was just on our flight as a passenger. But he
was easy to communicate with. Oh, yes. As a matter
of fact, he was a perfect diplomat. I'm sure he was
the diplomat for the flight. And he carried his own
briefcase and papers. Now, tell me, after you
returned, then what did you do with the bomber
group? Well, after we returned, it was then, you
know, see, this was in November 39, and we're
approaching the year of 1940, and, you know, we're
already, Europeans were already locked in
combat, and there was a strange war over there at
that time. Then, we began to see it, so we began to
expand the Air Force. The second bomb group was
split up and formed the Cadres for two groups. The
newest one being established at MacDill Air Force
Base in Tampa, Florida, and so happened the one I
was reassigned to. I wanted to go with General
LeMay, at that time Lieutenant LeMay, in another
outfit that was going to spin off called an
observation squadron, which that was later to be
the so-called reconnaissance arm of the United
States. And Colonel May went off in that area. You
were asked to be with him? No. I was assigned at how,
I don't know, but I was assigned to the 43rd Bomb
Squadron. It was going to be at Tampa Air Force
Base. And then we began to arrange for that trip. I
was selected to, because of my infantry
experience being in the 15th Field Artillery when
I tried to get to West Point Prep Security to lead
the motor convoy for the second bomb group. Well,
actually the bomb group was going to be organized
down at Tampa. So I led a group of vehicles about
get to fly the airplane down there. And we actually
went into a place called a groove field while
MacDill was being completed. I'm sure you've
heard of MacDill Air Force. I landed the first
airplane on that runway at MacDill Air Force
before it was completed. Sort of illegally, but I
did it. And then of course we began to train there.
How large was the groove? The aircraft, by the way,
were split up, and we had three B-17s and about five
or six B-18s, and an A-17, and then a trainer
airplane, PT-13. Just the makings of it. Sure.
Just woefully unequipped. Yeah. And how many men?
How many what? How many men? Oh, gee, I don't
remember how many men. I'd say we had about, in my
squadron, we must have had...
six or eight crews for bombing air, for a bomber.
Strictly a cadre, you know, storming around. And
we had to bring the new pilots in from a flying
school and build it up. So you were building, yeah.
Yeah, building. And lo and behold, right in the
middle of that come,
this is around of 1941
we had to get aircraft to the British RAF, and the
only way to do it was to have Americans ferry them. I
was a two and four engine qualified pilot, so I was
picked to be part of the hurry-up organized United
States Army Air Corps ferrying command. I was sent
out to Burbank, California. out in Lockheed
Hudson Bomber building by Lockheed to supply
those horrible things, clear up to Montreal where
the RAF would pick them up and fly them over to
England and that's the bombers they had for the
early part of the war against Hitler. And what kind
of bombers were we giving them? Lockheed Hudson
Bombers. Those old Lockheed Hudson Bombers that
couldn't carry more than two, three, five hundred
pounds. And actually didn't even have a bombing
system in them. But it was helped. at least we'd get
an airplane with the idea of eventually getting
equipment. Sure.
Now, as far as the British were concerned, did you
have an opportunity to meet any of the British
representatives? At that time, no. As a matter of
fact, we'd fly the airplane up to Montreal, get out
of the airplane, take our parachute, commercial
airliner and fly all the way back to Long Beach,
California, then start the whole thing over
again. Now when you flew, the bombers up there, how
often did you have to stop? We'd fly from, I'd take
off from Long Beach, my first stop would be Henson
Air Force Base in Dallas, Texas, because that's
where I lived, because I also lived with my current
wife at that time, Daytoner. And they wouldn't
mind if you went sort of an indirect route? Well,
no, yeah. That was one of the direct routes. As a
matter of fact, they picked it for us. It was the
most direct route, you know, refueling and all.
And also, weather dictated sometimes. We had two
or three routes. And because of my bombing
experience, when they formed these crews out
there, I was one of the lead crews. And we were
restricted to visual flights only. We couldn't
fly on instruments. See, a lot of them were brand
new pilots, comparatively speaking. Sure. So you
were a veteran. At that time, there were about
2,500 officers in the entire Army Air Corps. About
2,500 officers. By that time, I was first
lieutenant, by the way. So you were the pilot of the
plane, and I was the co-pilot. Yeah, I was the
pilot. Then we'd fly from there up to— From Texas up
to— You'd fly first to Texas and then from Texas.
Then to usually, for some reason or another, we'd
always go to Fort Wayne, Indiana. And then from
there, we'd go to Montreal. You had to make about
two stops between Los Angeles and Montreal
because of the range of the airplane. And we'd just
go back and forth. And how long would it take you to
fly between Montreal and California? Normally,
I'd stay overnight at Dallas. And quite often we'd
make the next flight in one day. I mean two days,
make the whole flight in two days. Sometimes I'd
have an engine problem or one of the guys, and we'd
fly three or four airplanes together in sort of a
loose formation. And maybe some problem would
cause us to wait over, you know, or maybe weather or
something. And I've had, well, sometimes it'd
take maybe three or four days to make that trip.
That started, I believe, that started around
February or March, I believe. Or April, somewhere
in there, spring. And then it was while I was a
member of that, and doing that work, that one of my
ex-buddies, my roommate at MacDill Air Force
Base, Gibble Griller, called me on the telephone
to tell me about Skip Adair recruiting guys for the
American Volunteer Group in China. And then this
opened up the story, of course, of the Flying
Tigers. Now, why was I interested in this? That's
the question. I still wanted to get in fighters.
And here I was ferrying American aircraft, doing
my part to get them to England, who was fighting in
the war. I knew we were going to get in war. I was
convinced. And third, I wanted a regular
commission. I was a career officer by then. I'd
been a reserve officer all along. I had never had
college at all. I wanted to be a regular officer. I
was committed. I didn't want to be an aeronautical
engineer. I wanted to be a pilot in the United
States Army. I wanted to be a pilot in the Air Force.
And you could get a regular commission by
volunteering for the Flying Tigers? Well, I
figured that we were going to get in the war. There
was only about 2,500, incidentally, go back a
minute. I did take an examination one time at
Langley Field between when I first reported there
in February of 39 up until early part of 41 when we
went down to Tampa. I took an examination of, it was
by some senator's name, Morrison Rowdy, or I can't
remember the name, but it's, You could take
examinations and get a regular commission that
way. They'd select very few. A Brownell Act, I
think they called it, B-R-O-W-N-E-L, I think
that's the way it's called. But I didn't have
college. Sure. And they were held against me. So I
knew I had to have college some way, but this comes
up later on. I knew if we got in war, and I knew that if
I had combat experience, I knew in China, I knew
we'd be clashing with the Japanese. The Japanese
were already fighting the Chinese. And I knew, as a
matter of fact, we were in on all practical
purposes going to be the Chinese airport. So I knew
I'd have combat experience. And I'd signed a
one-year contract of Flying Tigers, AVG. Then I'd
come back home, and here we are getting ready,
well, tracking in the war by then, and expanding,
obviously. Then certainly they'd give me a
regular commission. I just knew it. I hadn't made
it. So that was one of the reasons that you wanted to
get an applying doctor. There were three reasons.
Three reasons. I wanted to get fighters. I wanted
to get a regular commission. And I wanted to make
some money to put my mother and father in a home that
was paid
for. And tell me about the money. How'd they pay
you? I'd get $500 for every aircraft I shot down.
And that was the main thing that attracted me. I
figured I'd get in combat, and I'd shoot Japanese
down. Plus, in fact, I got $600 a month as a wingman,
and all my expenses paid, and so forth and so on. And
who paid for your expenses? Who gave you the money?
This came out of Lend-Lease money, really. The
Chinese government paid, but it was originally
given by Americans. It was Americans. But when you
got a check, did it say the Republic of China on it?
When you got a check, it was, the check was made out,
how was it? What was that corporation?
Air America? CAMCO. CAMCO. Central Aircraft
Manufacturing Company. CIA, if you will. Or,
we'll forget that remark. But Lend-Lease. Oh, we
all know that. Well, sure. Lend-Lease, OK.
Lend-Lease, really. At least money. But see, here
I'm getting into dickerings between foreign
countries again. China didn't have an air force.
Chennault was over there. He'd been away since
about 1937. And this is a story you should hear. How
did the Flying Tigers ever get started, ABG?
I'm sure you've heard of Sun, S-W-N-G, a very
influential Chinese man. and needing help with
fighting the Japanese. Through his State
Department offices,
he gave an interview to the JISMO with Chenault.
Chenault was over there with the Generalissimo.
They'd been trying to set up a train to train a
polyglot bunch of, even some Russians. And it was
some sort of an air force for the Chinese, and no
more than three or four months it tracked up all the
aircraft, and it was just no good. And Chenault got
the idea of recruiting some top-notch American
pilots and aircrew, and sold Soong on it. Soong got
the ear of President Roosevelt. And in a 30-minute
dissertation to the President of the United
States, Soong, just a second, honey, and you can't
find this in writing anyplace, Chenault talked
President Roosevelt into letting him Soong or
Chenault? No. Soong and Chenault. Oh, they were
both in Washington, D.C. Oh, yes. And a madam. And a
madam. Yeah. Generalist of Moshe and Kashek's
wife. Yeah. The biggest beggar in the world. Yeah.
But very influential. Those three, in 1937. Is
there a 37 or 38? No, wait a minute. This
could have been around 1940, that late. Maybe
early 1941. I have a document someplace. At any
rate, in 30 minutes, the President told Chenault,
yes, I'll give authorized to own channels and then
you can start tomorrow. But you will be permitted
to recruit any pilot and any air maintenance man
that you want to recruit from the United States
Army Air Corps or the United States Navy or the
United States Marine Corps that will volunteer to
go with you. You've got an open ticket to go. And he
began to recruit. How about private? Oh yeah, if he
wanted to. But he wanted military training. Sure
he did. To my knowledge, there was not one single
civilian commercial type pilot in our group.
It was 48, I'd say 47% Air Force, maybe 2% Marine,
and 51% Navy. There were a hundred pilots. He was
going to recruit a hundred pilots and he was going
to get a hundred P-40s that were sitting in crates
in Buffalo at the Curtis Wright outfit that were
turned down by the British for the North African
campaign. Why were they turned down? Already
obsolete. They never coped with the Major Schmidt
and Falkirk aircraft. This was like a Hurricane
Hunter type aircraft. And at that time, see, we
didn't know much about Negro. Right.
OK, let's go.
OK, we want to find out about how you left the
service, got in the flying tires, and how that
worked. I mean, legally, how did that work?
Well, see, we had a land lease arrangement that was
set up. I guess originally for the European area,
but extended it worldwide. This is when the
Chinese jumped aboard, and then it was
coincidental that they had Chennault over there
trying to develop them an air force to fight Japan.
They'd been fighting Japan for several years.
Yeah, since 37. Sure. And
Chennault had just practically given up with any
of the efforts.
the ways that the Chinese were trying to do it. So
then they got this idea with the backing and . And
soon, and of course Roosevelt, and then we were
practically in war anyhow. And whether it was
legal or not, that's the reason I say I have never
seen anything in writing on this. And I'm told,
much personally, that there's nothing written
any place. Just when all gave, I mean, the
president of Roanoke gave instructions over the
telephone. And next thing I know, I got this call
one night out at Long Beach from Gibbo Grover, one
of my roommates that I lived with and flew together
at the 43rd bomb group there in McDale. And he said,
you always want to get in fighters. You've got a
chance. you ever hear of General Chennault? And I
said, well, yeah, I've heard of him. Make a long
story short, well, Gip Adair had been this guy that
was going, he was an ex-retired Air Force guy, and
he happened to be a friend of Gibbo Broder's. When
he told Gibbo that at McDill, he was authorized to
go on the base and recruit pilots. So Gibbo comes, I
know a man that'd be dying to get in your outfit, so
who is it? Charlie Bond, well. Kibo called me and
gave me the phone number, and I called Kip Adair,
and he explained generally what he was on to.
One-year contract paid by the Chinese, which was
out of Lend-Lease money. And that's the way the
whole thing was financed.
And when we get in combat, if you get in combat with
Japanese, you get $500 in cash for every airplane
you shoot down, deposited to a bank of your choice
in the United States. All your transportation
expenses will be paid. Your living expenses in
China will be paid.